The 2010 census

Tilting rightwards

Dec 29th 2010              | CHICAGO

| from PRINT EDITION

What the latest count shows about America

REPUBLICANS had a good electoral year in 2010. They seized the House of Representatives. They won more state legislative seats than at any point since 1928. The next decade, however, may bring even greater triumphs. The otherwise rather boring figures released on December 21st by the Census Bureau, in its latest look at the population, are, to Republicans, rather thrilling. When redistricting begins in 2011, several red states will gain congressional seats. Many blue states will lose them.

See all the population data in an 

The constitution requires fair representation in Congress. After a decennial count of the population, therefore, congressional seats are divvied up among states accordingly, a process called reapportionment. One politician's gain is food for another's neuroses. In 1920 rural politicians felt so threatened by the burgeoning cities that they held back reapportionment until the next count, in 1930.

This year's census had its share of controversy. From the right, Glenn Beck of Fox News declared that illegal immigrants should be left out of the survey. Michele Bachmann, a Republican congresswoman from Minnesota, said that nine of the ten census questions were unconstitutional. (The first census had six questions, most written by James Madison.) In the end, however, the Census Bureau completed its count with fewer glitches than expected. 

The 2010 census solidified many trends that began in the past century. The north-east and Midwest grew by 3.2% and 3.9% respectively, compared with 14.3% in the South and 13.8% in the West. For the first time, more people live in the West than the Midwest. This change might have been bigger but for the recession, which slowed migration to a trickle. America's population expanded by just 9.7% from 2000 to 2010, the slowest rate since the Great Depression. Nevada grew by 35.1%-quickly, to be sure, but a fraction of its 66.3% expansion in the 1990s.

The population's shift to the South and West means that congressional seats will move, too. The big winner from reapportionment is Texas, which will gain four seats. Florida will add two. Arizona, Georgia, Nevada, South Carolina, Utah and Washington state will all gain one seat. The only state in the sunbelt to lose a seat is Louisiana, which has suffered two hurricanes. The rest of the losing states are farther north. Ohio and New York will each shed two seats. Illinois, Iowa, Massachusetts, Michigan, Missouri, New Jersey and Pennsylvania will each lose one. 

These shifts offer a little good news for Democrats. Latinos, who tend to vote Democratic, helped to fuel the growth of the sunbelt, so Democrats may venture into states that were previously blood-red. Redistricting may also spring a new generation of Hispanic leaders into Congress. 

Mostly, however, the census is a boon to Republicans. The states that will lose seats are either Democratic strongholds or swing states. The loss of a congressional seat also means the loss of a vote in the electoral college, which decides presidential elections. States that voted for Barack Obama in 2008 will have less sway in 2012. 

Moreover, Republicans will have unprecedented control over redistricting. In November voters chose Republicans to lead state legislatures. Because these legislatures guide redistricting, Republicans will now be able to choose their voters. 

