New York's new governor

Fathers and sons

Dec 29th 2010              | NEW YORK

| from PRINT EDITION

High hopes for Andrew Cuomo are tempered by austere times

THE inauguration of Andrew Cuomo as governor of New York state will be a low-key affair. Unlike Eliot Spitzer's 2007 inaugural, a sort of coronation at which James Taylor sang, Mr Cuomo's will be drab. He will simply take the oath of office at midnight on New Year's Eve. Twelve hours later he will be sworn in. "This is not a time for the grand and expensive celebrations of the recent past," he says. "It is the time to return dignity, integrity and performance to state government."

Those have been in short supply for nearly four years. Mr Spitzer's arrogant ways, honed as he fought fraud on Wall Street, caused political gridlock in Albany, the state capital. Little more than a year into his term, he resigned after being caught consorting with a prostitute. David Paterson, his successor, was an affable fellow who proved incompetent and gaffe-prone. He dropped out of the governor's race after a week, and Mr Cuomo handily won the election in November. 

"His knowledge of politics in Albany is unprecedented in modern history," claims Doug Muzzio, a politics professor at Baruch College. That is mostly because Mr Cuomo was a chief aide to his father Mario, a former governor. He sees Hugh Carey, the governor who saved New York City during the 1975 financial crisis, as a model; Mr Carey's warning to the state legislature that "the days of wine and roses are over" may well be heard again. As head of the federal Housing and Urban Development Agency under Bill Clinton, Mr Cuomo made no particular waves. But he has won accolades as a politically savvy attorney-general in New York. He has just filed a lawsuit against Ernst &amp; Young, an accounting firm, which he accuses of helping its client Lehman Brothers "engage in a massive accounting fraud" (see article).   If Mr Cuomo actually gets anything done, that would be a novel departure in the Empire State. Within days of announcing his candidacy, he unveiled a 252-page plan that tackled everything from the state's abysmal finances to ethics proposals. Since then he has issued seven more manifestos, on topics ranging from job creation to farming to property taxes, which he wants to cap at 2%. Between 1998 and 2008, local property taxes in New York state grew by 73%. 

The new governor faces a $9 billion deficit. Mr Paterson made some deep cuts this year to close the gap; more will come under Mr Cuomo, who ran as a fiscal conservative. There will also be blood: more state job cuts are likely. If the state legislature fails to co-operate (as is its wont), Mr Cuomo could well use Mr Paterson's novel, though desperate, strategy of issuing executive orders to get his budget passed. For the moment, he is trying a different tack. He has already met Assembly leaders, including Sheldon Silver, the powerful speaker, and has been talking to the unions, with whom he will also have to negotiate. He has the support of the Committee to Save New York, a group of businessmen that includes Felix Rohatyn, who restructured New York City's debt in the 1970s. The committee is in the thick of raising $10m to battle the unions over salaries, pensions and benefits.

In many ways Mr Cuomo is the anointed heir at last ascending to the throne. But after a disastrous campaign for the job in 2002, ending with his withdrawal from the race, the son of the famously angst-ridden Mario has become more cautious than he was. He knows he has to prove himself capable, and fast. It is all very well to make a show of keeping his inauguration simple and making his staff work on New Year's Day; but after four years of drift the good folk of New York hope to see a bit of substance, as well as a change of style. 

