Tensions on the Korean peninsula

Talking down the barrel of a gun

Dec 29th 2010              | SEOUL AND TOKYO

| from PRINT EDITION

After a bold show of force, South Korea revives the prospect of talks

Praying for peace

IF ROUND one in the renewed phoney war on the peninsula indisputably went to North Korea, after its attack on the island of Yeonpyeong in November, round two over Christmas went to Seoul-on propaganda points, at least. The South sought to deter further aggression by staging a large show of force in exercises involving the firing of live ammunition near North Korea. On December 29th its president, Lee Myung-bak, followed this up with a surprise call for dialogue.

The military drills were delicate, particularly one on December 20th around Yeonpyeong. But there was no armed retaliation. Instead, on the same day, Pyongyang let it be known it was willing to admit United Nations nuclear inspectors into its recently unveiled uranium-enrichment facility. Nor did the North make any attempt to shoot the lights off a towering Christmas tree, which was illuminated for the first time in seven years by evangelists from the South within range of religion-loathing North Korean snipers.

Militarily, the situation remains on a hair-trigger. On December 23rd a commander in Pyongyang threatened to use nuclear weapons in a "sacred war" if the North was attacked. In a similarly implacable year-end radio address, South Korea's President Lee warned that the South would respond "relentlessly" to any North Korean attack, whatever the risk.

But a government source said President Lee was also keen to remind North Korea that his government remains open for talks under the six-party framework, involving North and South Korea, America, China, Japan and Russia. First, however, it needs assurances from Pyongyang that it is committed to scrap its nuclear arsenal.

This may be an attempt to defuse tensions. After all, in Seoul there are widespread fears of more attacks next year and possibly a third nuclear test. Such aggression would leave Mr Lee little option but to retaliate. His popularity dipped sharply when the armed forces were perceived as weak in their response to the Yeonpyeong attack and the torpedoing in March, allegedly by North Korea, of a naval corvette in which 46 sailors died. 

From overseas too, there are calls for a stronger response. Burwell Bell, a retired general who led American forces in South Korea in 2006-08, argued in a recent paper that America should return an Army attack-helicopter battalion to South Korea and base an additional air-force fighter squadron there. He called the situation the most dangerous it has been in years.

China, North Korea's backer, insists on denuclearisation talks as the way to settle the peninsula's problems. America has ridiculed the idea of talking for the sake of talking. But after President Lee's latest statement, there will be plenty to discuss when America's defence secretary, Robert Gates, visits Beijing on January 9th and President Hu Jintao travels to America on January 19th. Even with the prospect of talks, the peninsula is a more dangerous place than it has been for years.

