Nigeria's restive delta

The president is threatened by a fraying amnesty

Dec 29th 2010              | OBUBRA

| from PRINT EDITION

Former militants in the oil-rich Niger Delta could go back to war-and dent President Goodluck Jonathan's chance of election in April

Correction to this article

AT A disused military compound in Obubra, north of Nigeria's south-eastern city of Calabar, hundreds of men in white baseball caps emblazoned with the word "amnesty" are taking an unusual exam. They are being tested on peace and love. "If you dey [are] together for one place and you get food to eat, you must share it together," explains Okotie Daniel, a student, to an oral examiner; though 29, he is unable to complete the written test. It is on the likes of Mr Daniel that Goodluck Jonathan, Nigeria's president, depends for enhancing his reputation as a peacemaker, which could help him to clinch victory in the presidential election due on April 9th.

Mr Daniel and his classmates (some of them pictured above) are former militants from Nigeria's Niger Delta, which lies above Africa's biggest oil and gas reserves. In a campaign for a larger share of the vast revenues from these resources, local gangs in recent years have blown up foreign oil groups' pipelines and kidnapped expatriate staff. The consequent drastic drop in oil output has hit energy giants such as Royal Dutch Shell and America's ExxonMobil that operate in the region, as well as customers at petrol pumps around the world.

For most of 2010 an edgy calm prevailed. Thousands of insurgents agreed to a three-stage programme by laying down their arms, attending a "non-violence course" in Obubra, and doing vocational training as part of an amnesty that began 18 months ago. Yet, even as this batch of former fighters took their exams in December, Nigeria's army was battling fresh militant camps in nearby Delta state.

Depressingly for Mr Jonathan, new rebel leaders have been springing up to replace an old guard bought off in the amnesty of 2009. The Movement for the Emancipation of the Niger Delta (MEND), one of the area's main armed groups, was supposed to have been part of the deal. But no sooner had its leaders signed up than new ones came to the fore who rejected the amnesty. MEND declared over Christmas that it would consider accepting a new amnesty in 2011, but it has a habit of changing its mind; factions within MEND often dissent from the leadership's view. 

One recalcitrant figure is Tamunotonye Kuna, known as Commander Obese. He is accused of masterminding the abduction of 19 oil and construction workers in separate attacks on offshore oil-rigs in November. He has since been arrested and the hostages released. But John Togo, another new rejectionist rebel, is proving harder to catch. He is the suspected leader of the Niger Delta Liberation Force, another gang, which has claimed responsibility for a rash of pipeline attacks in recent weeks. 

The ability of Mr Jonathan to contain these attacks and preserve the amnesty is a big part of his bid to win the presidential election. A former vice-president under President Umaru Yar'Adua, who died last May, Mr Jonathan hails from the Delta region and has vowed to halt the conflict in his backyard. The violence is still well below its peak, and oil is being produced at a respectable 2.1m barrels a day: below the 2.5m reached at its zenith in 2005, but well above its nadir of 1.7m in mid-2009. If the skirmishes spread or get out of hand, however, the peace deal could unravel and oil production could dive again. 

Few Delta residents and observers have been optimistic about the amnesty. But some now think the peace deal may be making matters worse by creating a warped career path that rewards the insurgents without bringing real stability. Militants who catch the government's attention and then agree to drop their guns get monthly stipends of 65,000 naira ($423), nearly nine times the official minimum wage. Commanders in charge of distributing these stipends often pocket the cash, earning even more for themselves while seeking to keep their hold over the fighters, who may be tempted to revert to robbery and violence in the creeks. "A crucial part of [the scheme] is breaking the militant groups' structure," says Austin Onuoha, a private consultant to the government. "But how has anything really changed?"

The amnesty follows a pattern of similar smaller deals in the past that have failed to have a lasting effect. Mr Kuna used to work under Farah Dagogo, a MEND commander who has accepted this amnesty. Mr Dagogo likewise came to the fore after his boss was bought off in a previous deal. The life of a high-rolling militant is far more lucrative than the few jobs on offer. Many gangs are now motivated more by fat profits from kidnapping for ransom and oil thefts from sabotaged pipelines than by political ideals. Tales abound of fridges in the creeks stocked with champagne. 

Students in Obubra seem genuinely relieved to have left the guns and swamps behind. They were mostly lowly militants unable to find any other work. But they are already worrying about how they will find jobs once the scheme ends. Despite Nigeria's wealth of natural resources, almost half of the young in cities are jobless, according to official data. And the environmental damage wreaked by 50 years of oil production has wiped out many of the Delta's rural jobs, such as farming and fishing. Across Nigeria, 80% of the people earn less than $2 a day.

As the polls approach, jobless youths may be forced to reconsider their traditional role as hired thugs for local politicians, which often becomes a route back to lawless militancy. Allen Onyema, who runs the non-violence course, says a long-term plan for ex-militants is vital. "Politicians are ready to recruit them...election year is coming," he says. "Even while at Obubra, the boys are receiving calls to do one thing or another. Sometimes they play it on speaker-phone for us to hear." It is a message Mr Jonathan could well heed too. 

Correction: We originally translated the pidgin English "dey" as "die". It in fact means "are" or "be". This was corrected on December 30th 2010.

