Kenya and the international court

Will they go quietly?

Dec 29th 2010              | KERICHO

| from PRINT EDITION

A coalition of the accused may try to block the International Criminal Court

Uhuru ponders the price of freedom

THE chief prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC), Luis Moreno-Ocampo, has rattled a chunk of Kenya's political establishment by formally demanding that some of its most powerful people be summoned to The Hague to answer for crimes against humanity after a ruinous election at the end of 2007. But this has delighted most ordinary Kenyans. Mr Moreno-Ocampo charges that incitement by politicians and civil servants directly led to the deaths of 1,200 Kenyans and the displacement of at least 300,000.

The biggest names on Mr Moreno-Ocampo's list of six are Uhuru Kenyatta, the minister of finance and a son of the country's founding president, Jomo Kenyatta, and William Ruto, a minister for higher education, who is at present suspended pending separate corruption charges. Mr Kenyatta is a Kikuyu; Mr Ruto's group is the Kalenjin, a cluster of tribes from the Rift Valley to which Kenya's second president, Daniel arap Moi, belongs. Mr Moreno-Ocampo accuses Mr Kenyatta of organising and paying a Kikuyu criminal gang, the Mungiki, to kill, rape, and bludgeon people from opposing tribes. Mr Ruto, for his part, is said to have been the overlord of Kalenjin warriors in the Rift, where they torched Kikuyu communities, murdering innocents as they went. 

A bigger surprise was the ICC's decision to go after Francis Muthaura, Kenya's most senior civil servant. As secretary to the cabinet, the mellifluous Mr Muthaura may well be the closest adviser to President Mwai Kibaki, a Kikuyu. Mr Muthaura is a Meru, a group closely related to the Kikuyu. Mr Kibaki will find it hard now to remain aloof from the process. Publicly, he has spoken of Kenya's support for the ICC. But his aides are scheming with Mr Ruto, hitherto their sworn enemy, to remove Kenya's signature from the Rome treaty that set up the court in the first place. A bill to do just that has already been passed by Parliament. Hectic discussions about how to snub the ICC have apparently been going on behind the scenes in Kenyan government circles since 2008.

Mr Kenyatta has quite a lot of support among his own tribe; among the Kalenjin, Mr Ruto's is even stronger. But it will not be easy for a "coalition of the accused" to fend off the international court, of which most Kenyans still approve. A recent survey suggests that 73% of them expect the accused to be tried before it. Most of Kenya's media have been sympathetic to Mr Moreno-Ocampo. A statement this week in favour of the ICC by the head of the Catholic church in Kenya, Cardinal John Njue, indicates a hardening attitude outside the political cabal; in the past, the churchman had been a close ally of Mr Kibaki. Nor is the ICC likely to be patient: should the accused stir up trouble in their efforts to stymie a trial, says Mr Moreno-Ocampo, an international arrest warrant will be issued. As things stand, they have been asked to come to The Hague of their own accord.

And then there is the prime minister, Raila Odinga, still the nearly-man of Kenyan politics, whose Luo group felt most bitter that its leader was prevented by fiddles from winning the top job after the recent election. No one was called to answer for the brutal ethnic cleansing of Kikuyus that went on in his own political heartland in western Kenya. That oversight may cause resentment among other Kenyans, especially Kikuyus and Kalenjin, in the rest of the country. 

So far, Mr Odinga has said Kenya must abide by the ICC. The only price he might accept for turning against it is probably too steep for those due to go on trial: a tacit understanding by them that, in contrast to what happened in 2007, they would ensure he wins the presidency in 2012. 

