The Khodorkovsky verdict

Doing things the Putin way

Dec 29th 2010              | MOSCOW

| from PRINT EDITION

The system, constructed by Vladimir Putin, that put Mikhail Khodorkovsky in prison keeps him there

NOBODY expected Mikhail Khodorkovsky and Platon Lebedev, the former controlling shareholders of the Yukos oil company, to be acquitted, just as nobody believed they were guilty of stealing oil and laundering the proceeds. But there was some hope, however irrational, that Viktor Danilkin, the judge presiding over their trial, might find the courage to resist political pressure and deliver justice.

It was not to be. On December 27th, after a 22-month trial, Mr Danilkin rose to read his verdict: "The court has established that as part of an organised-crime group..." The word "Guilty" immediately spread among the journalists and supporters barred from the court. It sounded like a verdict on the system that had put Mr Khodorkovsky and Mr Lebedev in prison in 2003 and that had orchestrated a second trial to keep them there.

The political nature of the case could not have been made more obvious in the closing days of the trial. The reading of the verdict was supposed to start on December 15th, but was postponed without explanation. The next day Vladimir Putin, Russia's prime minister, delivered his own verdict: "A thief must stay in jail," he said during a phone-in session with the Russian people, borrowing a line uttered by a tough, leather-clad cop in a popular Soviet-era thriller. 

"We need to proceed from the fact that Mr Khodorkovsky's crime has been proven in court," Mr Putin continued. A spokesman said he was referring to the first case against the tycoon. But the mingling of the tenses sounded like an instruction to the judge. (In Stalin's show trials a guilty verdict was delivered first by Stalin and the party, and only then confirmed by the court.) Mr Putin also (again) accused Mr Khodorkovsky of murder.

Moving the verdict to December 27th, when the West was in a Christmas lull and Russians were busy with new-year shopping, looked designed to bury it. As if to limit the damage further, the court also kept most journalists out and stopped a video transmission of the trial. This did not prevent a crowd of hundreds outside the court from shouting "freedom" (for Mr Khodorkovsky) and "shame" (to the riot police dragging some of them away). 

Hillary Clinton, America's secretary of state, and some of her European counterparts have spoken about the selective application of justice in Russia. "Attempts to exert pressure on the court are unacceptable," Russia's foreign ministry protested. Yet several Russian observers have said that the second trial was not about the selective application of justice (that had happened in 2003, when the pair were arrested), but about the selective application of injustice. Unlike the first sentence, which expires in 2011, the second conviction has no legitimacy among the Russian elite.

In the first trial the defendants were convicted of avoiding taxes on the sale of Yukos's oil. That was contradicted in the second trial by the claim they stole much of that same oil. The charges may be surreal, but the sentence will be real enough. Prosecutors have asked for a maximum 14-year prison term (whether this includes the seven years the two men have already served is unclear). Sentencing may not take place until December 31st, when Russia shuts down for a ten-day holiday.

What is clear is that it will be determined by the political needs of Mr Putin rather than by the requirements of the law. Mr Khodorkovsky's captivity and the state's expropriation of Yukos form a linchpin of the political system constructed by Mr Putin. And to judge by his recent activity, he has no plans to retire soon. 

Putin steps forward

In the past few weeks observers have been given a glimpse of Mr Putin's new political themes. After the murder in Moscow of a football fan by a man from Russia's north Caucasus republic of Dagestan, nationalist riots broke out under the Kremlin walls. Several of the men detained for the murder-although not the prime suspect-were later released by the police (for a bribe, some say), infuriating the fans. Their protest quickly acquired a racist tinge, and the mob turned on people from the north Caucasus, who are formally Russian citizens but have long ceased to be treated as such.

The sight of thousands of men shouting nationalist slogans and threatening ethnic conflict in the heart of Moscow spooked Russia's elite. Dmitry Medvedev, Russia's president, made a few statements, but Mr Putin at first kept his silence.

Then, on December 21st, Mr Putin met with some of the fans and laid a wreath on the grave of their murdered friend. This gesture spoke louder than any of the prime minister's words about the need to respect different ethnic traditions. (Mr Putin said nothing when Anastasia Baburova, a 25-year-old anti-fascist activist, was killed in broad daylight two years ago.) Mr Putin also pledged to toughen registration rules for internal migrants in Moscow and other large Russian cities-a longstanding demand of far-right groups.

The Kremlin has long flirted with nationalists, sponsoring thuggish youth groups such as Nashi (Ours), and allowing marches in Moscow. But this is the first time Mr Putin has exploited nationalist themes so blatantly. He has always used threatening events in Russia as an excuse to consolidate power. There is no reason why he should change his tactics in 2011-the year when the name of Russia's next president will become clear. 

