German taxes

Not a mere bagatelle

Dec 29th 2010              | BERLIN

| from PRINT EDITION

New-year revellers will have to pay more to celebrate with German bubbly

Clink, clink, another tax

BUY the prosecco, it's cheaper, advises Alexander Jeschke, proprietor of the Vinifera wine shop on Berlin's Klausenerplatz. Italian prosecco does not pay the Schaumweinsteuer ("sparkling-wine tax") of euro1.02 ($1.34) a bottle. German Sekt does. Prosecco fizzes rather than foams and so, to the chagrin of German bubbly-makers, is deemed to be a tax-free Perlwein, not a Schaumwein. The tax is a burden for producers and distorts the market, grumbles Ralf Peter Muller, head of the association of Sekt makers. 

The Schaumweinsteuer belongs to Germany's arsenal of irksome "bagatelle taxes", many of which are holdovers from earlier eras. It was first levied in 1902 as a way of getting the rich to help pay for the construction of the Kaiser's navy, putting it among the lesser-known causes of the first world war. (Ordinary folk were doing their part by drinking beer.) It was scrapped in 1933 to stimulate the economy but Hitler brought it back, again with martial intent, six years later.

The Schaumweinsteuer is a relative latecomer. The coffee tax (now euro2.19 a kilo for roast coffee, euro4.78 for instant) was pioneered in the 18th century by Prussia's Frederick the Great, who saw the beverage as a challenger to beer, a money-spinner for the state. Perhaps more worrying to the monarch, coffee threatened to stimulate ideas that alcohol could be counted on to dull. The import and roasting of coffee became state monopolies; royal sniffers sought out rogue roasters. Today's hunt tax, levied by some municipalities, is a distant relative of the 1,200-year-old Jagdregal, which reserved the bag, or part of it, for the lord. 

Stefan Ruppert, a scholar at the Max Planck Institute for European Legal History and a member of the Bundestag from the Free Democratic Party, sees bagatelle taxes as the handiwork of an "absolutist state", eager to prod behaviour as well as to raise money. Liberals pushed back in the 19th century but Otto von Bismarck's alliance with conservative parties after 1878 meant a return to meddling. Bagatelle taxes often come atop others (value-added tax on sparkling wine is 19%). Some, like the "second-apartment tax", are so costly to administer they may barely be worth collecting. Hunters insist they provide a public service and should not be taxed further. In Rhineland-Palatinate they have stopped disposing of roadkill in protest.

But bagatelle taxes are not going away. The federal government gulped down nearly euro1.5 billion in revenue from sparkling wine and coffee in 2009. Deficit-ridden municipalities are growing more inventive as their desperation increases. A euro20 monthly levy on tanning beds in Essen, in the Ruhr region, should bring in euro150,000 a year. Luckau, in Brandenburg, tried to levy a tax on wind turbines but was rebuffed by the eastern state's government. Several cities tax "sexual enjoyment", and more plan to. Cologne raises euro750,000 a year from prostitutes, pornography and sex fairs. Tax on sex in the city looks like a hit, with mayors at least. 

