Slovakia and the euro

Bratislava&#039;s plan B

Dec 29th 2010              | BRATISLAVA

| from PRINT EDITION

Slovakia believes in the euro zone's rules. Not a popular stance

SHEDDING a bad name often takes years of sweat. But when Slovakia capped a decade of economic recovery by adopting the euro in January 2009, it seemed to complete its transformation from what Madeleine Albright, then America's secretary of state, called a "black hole in the middle of Europe" into a trusted European partner.

Now Slovakia's economic policy has again been riling policymakers in Brussels and Berlin. The reason this time is not the sleaze and cronyism of the 1990s, but Slovakia's prickly principles. The country refused to join in the euro80 billion ($105 billion) euro-zone contribution to the bail-out of Greece. Irked by what they consider to be the euro zone's habit of rewarding indigence and penalising thrift, and concerned about what they see as a drift towards fiscal union, some senior Slovaks are even threatening to dump the common currency altogether. 

The speaker of parliament, Richard Sulik, who also leads the free-market Freedom and Solidarity party, wrote in a newspaper article: "Since we are too small...to influence the actions of the European Union, we must at least protect values that people living in Slovakia have created." He proposed that Slovakia stops "blindly trusting" the euro zone's leaders and seeks a "plan B" instead. "I remember very well how the strict guardians of the euro...buggered about [Slovak finance ministers] Miklos and Pociatek. We endured it all, with silent approval even, convinced that we were joining a club that abides by its own rules."

The prime minister, Iveta Radicova, hurriedly reassured her European partners about Slovakia's continued commitment to the single currency. But euro-enthusiasm is ebbing fast, even in her SDKU party, which spearheaded the country's European integration. Though Ms Radicova has agreed to Slovakia's participation in the broader euro440 billion euro-zone bail-out fund, she also wants new rules to allow countries to go bankrupt, with the private sector taking its share of the pain. Free-market principles can be irritating, especially when people start taking them literally.

