Rail fares

After the deluge, the pinch

Dec 29th 2010 | from PRINT EDITION

Britain's expensive trains are set to get even pricier

THE only thing that makes Britons grumble about their trains more than travelling on them is not being able to travel on them. Besides closing many of the country's airports, the heavy snow that fell in December brought the railways to a halt, too. Trains were cancelled or delayed, commuters frustrated and in several cases passengers were trapped in snowbound carriages overnight.

More bad news is arriving with the thaw: from January 1st rail fares will rise across the network by an average of 6.2%. That is considerably higher than the rate of inflation-currently 3.3%-and far above wage increases, which are averaging just 2.2%. The headline figure disguises much heftier hikes on some routes, several of which will see double-digit mark-ups.

Fiscal austerity is not solely to blame, even if, like most of the rest of Whitehall, the Department for Transport-which supports and supervises both the train-operating firms and Network Rail, the company that runs and maintains the tracks-must soon find big spending cuts. The higher fares can be traced back to a policy introduced by the previous Labour government. Worried about the ballooning subsidy to the railways, which hit pound5.2 billion ($8.9 billion) in 2008-09, it wanted passengers to make a bigger contribution. Further price rises are likely over the coming years for the same reason. Ministers in both the Labour administration and its coalition successor have promised consolatory improvements, with new carriages, longer platforms and more electrified track all designed to ease the crowdedness that affects commuter lines in particular. 

Still, the looming rises are set to provoke an uproar. British rail fares are already among the most expensive in the world. Just over half of passengers think trains offer value for money; according to one recent survey, around 15% of them would consider abandoning trains or moving house to avoid these steeper fares.

Yet the government can mount a reasonable case in defence of the increases. It is not clear why the public should be heavily subsidising a mode of transport that accounts for a tiny minority of all travel: 8% of the total distance travelled in Britain during 2009, compared with 85% by cars and vans. The relatively few who use railways often are disproportionately well-off: three-fifths of the traffic is concentrated in the wealthy commuting counties of the south-east.

In any case, the steady increase in the cost of rail travel over the past 30 years (trains are now around 50% more expensive in real terms than in 1980) has not stopped passenger numbers growing to their highest level since the end of the second world war. Many rail firms enjoy a virtually captive market: trains are very good at moving commuters into and out of large cities; congestion on the roads means that many people have no real alternative. Passengers might grumble about the new fares, but most will pay up nonetheless. 

