Motorola

Breaking up

Dec 29th 2010 | from PRINT EDITION

Even spun off, Motorola's mobile-phone unit may not stage a comeback

SOMETIMES the parts are worth more than the whole. This is the hope of Motorola, a faded telecoms giant, which will split itself in two on January 4th. But will this break-up indeed create value? Investors are not worried about the pedestrian parts of Motorola's business, which include emergency-services radios and hand-held scanners, and which will be hived off into a firm called Motorola Solutions. The problem is the other half, Motorola Mobility, a maker of mobile phones and TV set-top boxes.

Motorola's mobile-phone business has been struggling since its RAZR handsets fell out of fashion in the late 2000s. The unit recently staged something of a comeback by betting on smartphones running Android, an operating system developed by Google. Motorola's Droid models, in particular, have seen a measure of success. In the third quarter the unit made its first profit in three years.

Yet things may get worse before they get better. Many buyers of Droid phones are customers of Verizon, America's largest mobile-phone operator. It needed Motorola's smartphones to compete with AT&amp;T, the number two and, so far, the only network to offer the iPhone in America. But Verizon is rumoured to be launching a new version of Apple's gadget in January; if so, Motorola's market share is likely to shrink. Since the firm's handset business also tends to be slow early in the year, Sanjay Jha, its boss, expects a loss in the first quarter.

Motorola Mobility also has some longer-term problems. Other handset-makers are also betting on Android; so all may struggle to differentiate their products. Motorola's Droids, which come with a special user interface called Motoblur, have been among the leaders of the pack. But devices made by HTC, a Taiwanese firm, are just as good and other makers are catching up fast.

Motorola-like HTC-is thus a bellwether for makers of Android phones, whose sales have now caught up with those of the iPhone-about 300,000 a day worldwide. Some industry analysts doubt that it will be able to create a big market for its devices and make enough profits before cheaper providers move in. If they are right, the smartphone market may eventually become like that for personal computers: a handful of huge competitors with tiny margins. The difference will be that these firms will hail from around the world rather than being mainly American.

