EADS

Peace on the Rhine

Dec 29th 2010              | PARIS

| from PRINT EDITION

A European defence giant heals wounds and looks ahead

Gallois the peacemaker

LOUIS GALLOIS, the chief executive of EADS, seems to have been doing his best to make the company boring. In many respects he has succeeded, presiding over a period of uncustomary managerial calm at the European aerospace and defence firm. This is some feat: until recently EADS seemed perpetually at risk of being torn apart by the Franco-German rivalries that had persisted from its creation, in a pan-European merger, in 2000.

Although Mr Gallois has brought calm to the management suite, the firm had a lively end to 2010. Airbus, EADS's civil-aviation arm, hit the news in November after a Rolls-Royce engine on a Qantas A380 superjumbo exploded in mid-flight. Rolls-Royce's modifications of similar engines will continue to affect Airbus's deliveries of A380s in 2011. In the same month an extraordinary error by the Pentagon saw EADS and Boeing, rivals for a $35 billion tanker contract from the United States Air Force, being sent confidential details of each other's bids. In December two Airbus executives were charged in connection with a long-running insider-dealing investigation by French authorities.

These unwanted excitements drew attention away from what the firm hoped would be the year-end's main event. On December 1st Airbus said it would fit its A320 short-haul workhorses with new, fuel-efficient engines from 2016. It was a tricky decision for EADS and Airbus. The duopoly which the A320 and Boeing's 737 have long enjoyed in this best-selling category of aircraft is coming under attack from new planes planned by Brazilian, Canadian, Chinese and Russian competitors, so innovation is needed. At the same time Airbus's engineering capacity is under strain from development work on the long-haul A350, a rival to Boeing's 787 Dreamliner. So instead of pressing forward with a radical redesign, Airbus plumped for a more limited upgrade. 

Such a decision might have caused ructions in the past: most of the company's big choices did. By tackling the sources of this endemic strife Mr Gallois has removed a crippling distraction. A new ethos of co-operation should help him with his long-term strategy-rebalancing EADS's military and civilian arms. The firm wants to reduce its dependence on the cyclical business of supplying commercial airliners, which brings in 65% of revenues. Boeing has already achieved such a rebalancing: it made 75% of revenues from passenger aircraft in 1996 but the expansion of its military side has brought that down to 47%.

Until three years ago EADS was stuck with an unwieldy system that sought to balance the interests of the main French and German shareholders by employing co-chairmen and co-chief executives, one of each from each country. The inability of this system to weld French and German working practices and culture was made glaringly obvious by problems in developing the A380. French and German engineering teams worked separately using different design software, and as a result they made a mess of installing the aircraft's 500km of wiring. This and other mishaps resulted in the superjumbo rolling onto the runway two years late and billions of euros over budget. At a tense summit in 2007, Nicolas Sarkozy and Angela Merkel faced up to the fact that the dual management system must go.

Calm descends

So, after the summit, Mr Gallois was put in sole charge of EADS while his former co-chief executive, Tom Enders, a German, was made chief executive of Airbus; and calm descended. Their relationship is apparently good, partly because the pair are not in competition. Mr Gallois is 66 and his contract expires in mid-2012. The younger Mr Enders may expect to succeed him. 

Changes to EADS's board have also helped to diminish Franco-German rivalries. The appointments of Lakshmi Mittal, the eponymous boss of the world's biggest steelmaker, and Sir John Parker, a stalwart of many British boards, have brought a more international flavour. The board used to act like that of a (particularly testy) joint venture, continually having to seek Franco-German entente. Diplomatic leadership is still needed to balance French and German interests as well as those of Spain, which has a small stake in EADS, and Britain, where the company still has factories.

Those skills will also come in handy as EADS seeks to expand the defence side of its business. With military budgets under threat in many rich countries this is not a great time to be pushing into this industry. Indeed, the big defence contractors are looking beyond weapons for sources of growth, seeking to increase the size of their broader security businesses and looking at ways to guard against cyberwarfare. EADS has made border protection a speciality. 

Spreading out in this way involves tapping government budgets other than those dedicated to defence and even selling to private companies, a new tack for EADS. Defence budgets are still growing in emerging markets such as India, Brazil and the Middle East but these customers are likely to require investment in production capacity in their own countries, which will be another change for a business centred on Europe.

EADS, which earns most of its revenues from supplying equipment, wants to expand its high-margin services operations. It is also on the lookout for takeover targets, probably in America. Winning the Pentagon's tanker contract and starting to build aircraft at a planned factory in Alabama would help to change opinions in a country where EADS is regarded as an outsider. BAE Systems, a British defence company, now does half its business in America. Through canny acquisitions it has managed to appear home-grown there. Now that EADS is no longer a Franco-German war zone it has a better chance of pulling off the same trick.

