Technology and monopolies

Separation anxiety

Dec 29th 2010 | from PRINT EDITION

A free-marketeer wants more government intervention. Odd

The Master Switch: The Rise and Fall of Information Empires. By Tim Wu. Knopf; 384 pages; $27.95. To be published in Britain in March by Atlantic Books; pound19.99. Buy from Amazon.com, Amazon.co.uk

SIR TIM BERNERS-LEE, one of the pioneers of the internet, is deeply worried. In an article last year in Scientific American, he gave warning that the openness that has been central to the web's success is now under threat. Sir Tim's bugbears include powerful social networks that refuse to share the information they hold with the rest of the web, and cable companies that manipulate the flow of data over their networks to the advantage of their own commercial interests. 

Readers of "The Master Switch" by Tim Wu, an academic at Columbia University, will appreciate why Sir Tim is sounding the alarm. Mr Wu shows how a series of "information industries" in America, from telephony to radio and movies, have been through what he calls "the Cycle". After an initial flowering of entrepreneurial activity, individual firms or a cartel soon began to dominate. Among these have been AT&amp;T in telephony and a handful of powerful film studios in Hollywood. "Markets are born free," writes Mr Wu, "yet no sooner are they born than some would-be emperor is forging chains."

Sometimes the government has stepped in to remove these restraints, which is what happened when AT&amp;T was broken up by fiat in 1984 and forced to sell its local carriers. But it is more common, Mr Wu claims, for the state to side with information behemoths rather than promote competition. For instance, in the 1950s and 1960s the American government did everything it could to stymie the rise of cable television, which threatened the duopoly of NBC and CBS.

Eventually cable TV was able to disrupt the status quo anyway. However, Mr Wu now believes that a far more worrying round of "the Cycle" is upon us. The threat comes, he says, from entertainment conglomerates, cable firms and companies such as Apple that combine content and technology in unprecedented ways. America, he believes, should adopt a "Separations Principle" that would enforce a split between creators of content, those that distribute it and makers of devices on which it is consumed.

This is a puzzling prescription from someone who gives strong warning in his book against the limitations of government, dismissing it in one passage as "an inferior arbiter of what is good for the information industries". In effect, a "Separations Principle" would mean a far bigger role for the state, which would decide which category of activity a company falls into and then have to monitor it closely.

The move would also have a huge economic cost, a problem that Mr Wu quite happily glosses over. Many compelling innovations, such as Apple's iPhone, have come about precisely because the companies that gave birth to them straddle both content and technology. A better solution would be to ensure existing antitrust laws and other regulations are applied robustly to these companies. "The Master Switch" is a worthwhile read. Mr Wu has long believed some big companies have too much power, and he may be right. But giving too much power to the government instead is not the solution.

