Natural history

Birdman

Dec 29th 2010 | from PRINT EDITION

A marine scientist finds that change in the natural world is not all bad

Among friends

The View From Lazy Point: A Natural Year in an Unnatural World. By Carl Safina. Henry Holt; 416 pages; $32 and pound20. Buy from Amazon.com, Amazon.co.uk

CARL SAFINA'S childhood by the sea led him to become a marine ecologist and conservationist. He recently spent a year based at his cabin in the dunes of Lazy Point on Long Island, patrolling the local coastline and journeying to both polar regions. Studying the life he observed along the way, Mr Safina-like a country doctor-found himself taking the pulse of the planet.

Everywhere he found the natural world shifting in response to humanity. But the book that emerged from his journey is not so much a polemic against anthropogenic climate change as an impression of a world in flux, a lament about the damage caused by overexploitation, pollution and flawed economics, and a call to arms in the cause of hope.

In once-abused Alaska Mr Safina finds life resurgent. Thanks to the rich nutrients in its soil, it grows more wood mass per acre than anywhere in the world. The trees shade the streams and wood-falls create lagoons that promote ideal conditions for salmon. Bears pluck the teeming fish from the water and scatter their half-eaten remains through the forest, fertilising the soil to fuel the growth of trees-and so further boost the world's healthiest wild salmon runs.

Mr Safina's writing moves easily from revelatory observation sparked by a flash of bird or splash of fish to passionate, lyrical philosophy. He rails against the concept of growth-based development. He tears into Adam Smith's thoughts on the benefits of selfishness and argues that defending dirty energy is as morally bankrupt as defending slavery.

Mr Safina rubs away at the chalk circle that 19th-century thinkers drew around humanity to separate it from the natural world. He describes nature as mankind's church as well as its bank, and in Svalbard he becomes angry when he finds only bones where once great whales fuelled an economic boom. It is a "tragedy of the commons" that extends not just across space, but also across time, he explains. We are taking not only more than our fair share of our neighbour's grass, but also our children's.

Mr Safina provides many examples of the human urge to exploit. Walking on the beach near Lazy Point one night under a full moon, he comes across horseshoe crabs laying their eggs. The crabs have existed unchanged for 450m years, and their rich eggs have become a cornerstone in the local ecosystem. But they also make excellent bait. A pickup truck arrives on the beach, and a young commercial fisherman begins throwing the ancient creatures into the back of it. An impassioned debate follows.

In the course of his year of study, Mr Safina also finds nature retreating from the brink. Peregrine falcons dot the sky, the coral reefs of Palau are transformed from ghostly white skeletons to a riot of colour in only a decade, and once again an abundance of once-endangered striped bass are to be found in his home waters. More such changes are what he longs for.

